docs/site/blog/drafts/28-12-25-subagent-explain.mdx, before:

---
title: How to use subagents the right way
description: Subagents as Context Compression Functions
author: Chris Pang
date: 2025-12-28
---

When building deep agents, there's a persistent temptation to model subagents as domain specialists—a frontend agent, a backend agent, an orchestration agent. This feels intuitive because it maps to how we organize human teams. But this is wrong.

The problem isn't the abstraction itself. It's that domain-based subagents create information silos that lead to conflicting assumptions. By the time information reaches a specialized subagent, context about previous decisions has been lost. [Cognition's analysis](https://cognition.ai/blog/dont-build-multi-agents) demonstrates this with a simple example: building a Flappy Bird clone with separate frontend and backend agents results in mismatched aesthetics and broken assumptions. [Research on 200+ multi-agent traces](https://www.mongodb.com/company/blog/technical/why-multi-agent-systems-need-memory-engineering) found 36.9% of failures stem from inter-agent misalignment.

The correct mental model: **subagents are context compression functions**, not team members.

## Claude Code and the Subagent Pattern

[Claude Code](https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/building-agents-with-the-claude-agent-sdk) pioneered (or at least popularized) the practical use of subagents in production coding workflows. While building ai-sdk-deepagent, I spent considerable time experimenting with Claude Code's architecture and studying how they structure specialized agents.

[HumanLayer's `.claude/agents` directory](https://github.com/humanlayer/humanlayer/tree/main/.claude/agents) provides excellent real-world examples of this pattern. They've built specialized agents like:

- `codebase-locator` - Finds WHERE code lives (not what it does)
- `codebase-analyzer` - Understands HOW code works
- `codebase-pattern-finder` - Identifies existing patterns
- `web-search-researcher` - Conducts web research with structured output

Each agent has a tightly scoped mandate and explicit output format. Notice what they **don't** do:

```markdown
DO NOT suggest improvements or changes unless the user explicitly asks
DO NOT perform root cause analysis unless explicitly asked
DO NOT propose future enhancements unless explicitly asked
DO NOT critique the implementation or identify problems
```

This constraint is deliberate. Each subagent is a **documentarian, not a critic**. It returns structured findings, not opinions. This keeps output predictable and compressible.

Their `research_codebase` command demonstrates the pattern at scale:

```markdown
Spawn parallel sub-agent tasks for comprehensive research:
- Use codebase-pattern-finder to find examples
- Use codebase-analyzer for implementation details
- Use web-research agents for external context

Synthesize findings into a single research document
```

The parent agent delegates to specialized subagents, each exploring independently, then compresses their findings into a coherent report. This is the MapReduce pattern in practice.

## The Problem: Context Pollution

Consider what happens without proper context isolation:

```typescript
// ❌ Anti-pattern: Domain-specific agents sharing context
const agent = createDeepAgent({
  model: anthropic('claude-sonnet-4-5-20250929'),
  subagents: [
    {
      name: 'frontend-agent',
      description: 'Handles all frontend tasks',
      systemPrompt: 'You build React UIs...',
      tools: [reactTools, cssTools],
    },
    {
      name: 'backend-agent', 
      description: 'Handles all backend tasks',
      systemPrompt: 'You build APIs...',
      tools: [apiTools, databaseTools],
    },
  ],
});
```

What's wrong here?

1. Backend agent doesn't see frontend decisions (data structure expectations, UI constraints)
2. Frontend agent doesn't see backend capabilities (available endpoints, data formats)
3. Both agents pollute main agent context with implementation details
4. Coordination overhead grows quadratically with agent count

## The Solution: MapReduce Pattern

[Phil Schmid describes this](https://www.philschmid.de/context-engineering-part-2) as the MapReduce pattern: "treat agents as tools... the main agent invokes `call_planner(goal="...")`, the harness spins up a temporary sub-agent loop and returns a structured result."

[Anthropic's context engineering guide](https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/effective-context-engineering-for-ai-agents) is more specific: subagents explore using tens of thousands of tokens but return condensed 1,000-2,000 token summaries. Context stays isolated. The parent receives distilled insight, not exploration traces.

Here's the pattern in practice:

```typescript
import { createDeepAgent } from 'ai-sdk-deepagent';
import { anthropic } from '@ai-sdk/anthropic';

// Research subagent: compress exploration into structured findings
const researchAgent = {
  name: 'research-agent',
  description: 'Deep research with condensed output',
  systemPrompt: `Execute thorough research using available tools.
    
    Output format (required):
    {
      "findings": "2-3 sentence summary",
      "key_points": ["point1", "point2", "point3"],
      "sources": ["url1", "url2"]
    }
    
    Do NOT include search queries, intermediate reasoning, or tool call history.`,
  model: anthropic('claude-haiku-4-5-20251001'), // Cheaper model for focused work
};

const agent = createDeepAgent({
  model: anthropic('claude-sonnet-4-5-20250929'),
  systemPrompt: `You coordinate complex tasks. Delegate research to research-agent.
    It returns structured findings. Use those findings to complete your task.`,
  subagents: [researchAgent],
});
```

The key: **input specification and output schema are explicit**. The subagent is a pure function: `research(topic) → {findings, key_points, sources}`.

## Measuring the Impact

[Cursor's research](https://cursor.com/blog/semsearch) on semantic search demonstrates this quantitatively. Their agent performs extensive codebase exploration (semantic search + grep) in isolation, returning only relevant code segments. Result: 12.5% accuracy improvement. The main agent never sees the search process—just the compressed results.

This is context engineering, not prompt engineering. The question isn't "how do I write a better prompt?" It's "what information needs compression and what's the transformation function?"

## When to Use Subagents

Use subagents when **detail doesn't matter, only outcome matters**:

### 1. Research Tasks (Codebase or Web)

```typescript
// Parent agent doesn't need to see 50 web searches
// It needs: "Here's what I found about X"

const webResearchAgent = {
  name: 'web-research',
  description: 'Comprehensive web research',
  tools: [webSearch, webFetch], // These generate thousands of tokens
  systemPrompt: 'Research thoroughly. Return 3-paragraph summary with sources.',
};
```

### 2. Data Analysis

```typescript
// Parent doesn't need to see pandas operations
// It needs: "Mean: X, outliers: Y, correlation: Z"

const analysisAgent = {
  name: 'data-analysis',
  description: 'Statistical analysis of datasets',
  tools: [executeCode], // Runs analysis scripts
  systemPrompt: 'Analyze data. Return: summary stats, key insights, visualizations.',
};
```

### 3. Mundane Automation

[LangChain notes](https://blog.langchain.com/deep-agents/) that Claude Code's todo tool is essentially a no-op—it's context engineering, not functionality. Similarly:

```typescript
// Git commit message generation
const commitAgent = {
  name: 'commit-message',
  description: 'Generate commit messages from diffs',
  systemPrompt: 'Analyze git diff. Output: conventional commit message, nothing else.',
};
```

## Implementation Patterns

### Pattern 1: Structured Output Enforcement

```typescript
const agent = createDeepAgent({
  model: anthropic('claude-sonnet-4-5-20250929'),
  subagents: [{
    name: 'analyzer',
    description: 'Code quality analysis',
    systemPrompt: `Analyze code quality. Return ONLY valid JSON:
      {
        "score": 0-100,
        "issues": [{"type": "string", "severity": "high|medium|low", "line": number}],
        "recommendations": ["string"]
      }`,
  }],
});

// Subagent output is immediately parseable
for await (const event of agent.streamWithEvents({ 
  prompt: 'Analyze the quality of auth.ts' 
})) {
  if (event.type === 'subagent-finish') {
    const analysis = JSON.parse(event.result);
    console.log(`Quality score: ${analysis.score}`);
    // No context pollution from subagent's analysis process
  }
}
```

### Pattern 2: Model Mixing

```typescript
// Orchestrator uses Sonnet (reasoning)
// Subagents use Haiku (speed + cost)

const agent = createDeepAgent({
  model: anthropic('claude-sonnet-4-5-20250929'),
  subagents: [
    {
      name: 'formatter',
      model: anthropic('claude-haiku-4-5-20251001'), // Fast, cheap
      description: 'Code formatting',
    },
    {
      name: 'researcher', 
      model: anthropic('claude-haiku-4-5-20251001'), // Fast, cheap
      description: 'Quick fact lookup',
    },
  ],
});
```

### Pattern 3: Context Isolation Monitoring

```typescript
// Track what actually gets returned to parent

let contextSavings = { tokensBefore: 0, tokensAfter: 0 };

for await (const event of agent.streamWithEvents({ prompt: 'task' })) {
  if (event.type === 'subagent-start') {
    console.log(`Subagent ${event.subagentName} starting...`);
  }
  if (event.type === 'subagent-finish') {
    // Subagent used N tokens internally, returned M tokens to parent
    // Compression ratio: N/M
    console.log(`Compressed output: ${event.result.length} chars`);
  }
}
```

## Anti-Patterns to Avoid

### ❌ Shared Mutable State

```typescript
// Don't do this
const sharedState = { designDecisions: [] };

const agent = createDeepAgent({
  subagents: [
    { name: 'designer', /* mutates sharedState */ },
    { name: 'implementer', /* reads sharedState */ },
  ],
});
```

Why it fails: race conditions, order dependencies, implicit contracts.

### ❌ Chatty Subagents

```typescript
// Don't do this
systemPrompt: `Coordinate with other agents to align on the approach...`
```

Why it fails: exponential coordination overhead, context explosion.

### ❌ Over-specialization

```typescript
// Don't do this
subagents: [
  { name: 'button-specialist' },
  { name: 'form-specialist' },  
  { name: 'navigation-specialist' },
]
```

Why it fails: granularity creates integration hell. Subagents should compress complexity, not multiply it.

## When NOT to Use Subagents

[Cognition recommends](https://cognition.ai/blog/dont-build-multi-agents) starting single-threaded. One agent, continuous context, coherent decisions. Add subagents only when:

1. Context window becomes the bottleneck
2. Parallel exploration provides value (research, analysis)
3. You can define clear input/output contracts

[Google's ADK guide](https://developers.googleblog.com/architecting-efficient-context-aware-multi-agent-framework-for-production/) is explicit: "Every model call and sub-agent sees the minimum context required." If you can't define what context is minimum and necessary, you don't need a subagent yet.

## Conclusion

Subagents aren't organizational units. They're compression functions. The mental model shift:

- ❌ "This subagent specializes in frontend work"
- ✅ "This subagent compresses codebase exploration into structured findings"

Design subagents around information transformation, not domain expertise. Define explicit contracts: input schemas, output formats, token budgets. Monitor compression ratios.

As [Phil Schmid notes](https://www.philschmid.de/context-engineering-part-2): "Don't over-anthropomorphize your agents. You don't need an 'Org Chart' of agents (Manager, Designer, Coder) that chat with each other."

Build context compression pipelines instead.

**Note:** ai-sdk-deepagent was built by studying Claude Code's architecture and patterns from [HumanLayer's agent implementations](https://github.com/humanlayer/humanlayer/tree/main/.claude/agents). Their work on structured, purpose-driven agents informed many of the design decisions in this framework.

---

**References:**
- [Cognition: Don't Build Multi-Agents](https://cognition.ai/blog/dont-build-multi-agents)
- [Anthropic: Context Engineering for AI Agents](https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/effective-context-engineering-for-ai-agents)
- [Anthropic: Building Agents with Claude Agent SDK](https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/building-agents-with-the-claude-agent-sdk)
- [Phil Schmid: Context Engineering Part 2](https://www.philschmid.de/context-engineering-part-2)
- [Cursor: Semantic Search Research](https://cursor.com/blog/semsearch)
- [LangChain: Deep Agents](https://blog.langchain.com/deep-agents/)
- [Google: Multi-Agent Framework for Production](https://developers.googleblog.com/architecting-efficient-context-aware-multi-agent-framework-for-production/)
- [HumanLayer: Claude Code Agent Examples](https://github.com/humanlayer/humanlayer/tree/main/.claude/agents)

**Framework:** [ai-sdk-deepagent on GitHub](https://github.com/chrispangg/ai-sdk-deepagent)

Commit message:

docs: added draft blog post on subagents

docs/site/blog/drafts/28-12-25-subagent-explain.mdx, after:

---
title: How to use subagents the right way
description: Subagents as Context Compression Functions
author: Chris Pang
date: 2025-12-28
---

When building deep agents, there's a persistent temptation to model subagents as domain specialists—a frontend agent, a backend agent, an orchestration agent. This feels intuitive because it maps to how we organize human teams. But this is wrong.

The problem isn't the abstraction itself. It's that domain-based subagents create information silos that lead to conflicting assumptions. By the time information reaches a specialized subagent, context about previous decisions has been lost. [Cognition's analysis](https://cognition.ai/blog/dont-build-multi-agents) demonstrates this with a simple example: building a Flappy Bird clone with separate frontend and backend agents results in mismatched aesthetics and broken assumptions. [Research on 200+ multi-agent traces](https://www.mongodb.com/company/blog/technical/why-multi-agent-systems-need-memory-engineering) found 36.9% of failures stem from inter-agent misalignment.

The correct mental model: **subagents are context compression functions**, not team members.

## What NOT to Do: The Organizational Chart Anti-Pattern

Here's a real example of the wrong approach:

<img src="/blog/assets/tweet-2004597085467983965.png" alt="Tweet showing elaborate agent hierarchy" style={{ maxWidth: '500px', width: '100%' }} />

This structure—with domain-specific agents like `frontend-developer`, `backend-architect`, `mobile-app-builder`, `tiktok-strategist`, etc.—is precisely what you should **NOT** build. It treats subagents as team members with job titles rather than as context compression functions. Each agent becomes a silo, coordination overhead explodes, and information gets lost between handoffs.

The rest of this post explains why this fails and what to do instead.

## Claude Code and the Subagent Pattern

[Claude Code](https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/building-agents-with-the-claude-agent-sdk) pioneered (or at least popularized) the practical use of subagents in production coding workflows. While building ai-sdk-deepagent, I spent considerable time experimenting with Claude Code's architecture and studying how they structure specialized agents.

[HumanLayer's `.claude/agents` directory](https://github.com/humanlayer/humanlayer/tree/main/.claude/agents) provides excellent real-world examples of this pattern. They've built specialized agents like:

- `codebase-locator` - Finds WHERE code lives (not what it does)
- `codebase-analyzer` - Understands HOW code works
- `codebase-pattern-finder` - Identifies existing patterns
- `web-search-researcher` - Conducts web research with structured output

Each agent has a tightly scoped mandate and explicit output format. Notice what they **don't** do:

```markdown
DO NOT suggest improvements or changes unless the user explicitly asks
DO NOT perform root cause analysis unless explicitly asked
DO NOT propose future enhancements unless explicitly asked
DO NOT critique the implementation or identify problems
```

This constraint is deliberate. Each subagent is a **documentarian, not a critic**. It returns structured findings, not opinions. This keeps output predictable and compressible.

Their `research_codebase` command demonstrates the pattern at scale:

```markdown
Spawn parallel sub-agent tasks for comprehensive research:
- Use codebase-pattern-finder to find examples
- Use codebase-analyzer for implementation details
- Use web-research agents for external context

Synthesize findings into a single research document
```

The parent agent delegates to specialized subagents, each exploring independently, then compresses their findings into a coherent report. This is the MapReduce pattern in practice.

## The Problem: Context Pollution

Consider what happens without proper context isolation:

```typescript
// ❌ Anti-pattern: Domain-specific agents sharing context
const agent = createDeepAgent({
  model: anthropic('claude-sonnet-4-5-20250929'),
  subagents: [
    {
      name: 'frontend-agent',
      description: 'Handles all frontend tasks',
      systemPrompt: 'You build React UIs...',
      tools: [reactTools, cssTools],
    },
    {
      name: 'backend-agent', 
      description: 'Handles all backend tasks',
      systemPrompt: 'You build APIs...',
      tools: [apiTools, databaseTools],
    },
  ],
});
```

What's wrong here?

1. Backend agent doesn't see frontend decisions (data structure expectations, UI constraints)
2. Frontend agent doesn't see backend capabilities (available endpoints, data formats)
3. Both agents pollute main agent context with implementation details
4. Coordination overhead grows quadratically with agent count

## The Solution: MapReduce Pattern

[Phil Schmid describes this](https://www.philschmid.de/context-engineering-part-2) as the MapReduce pattern: "treat agents as tools... the main agent invokes `call_planner(goal="...")`, the harness spins up a temporary sub-agent loop and returns a structured result."

[Anthropic's context engineering guide](https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/effective-context-engineering-for-ai-agents) is more specific: subagents explore using tens of thousands of tokens but return condensed 1,000-2,000 token summaries. Context stays isolated. The parent receives distilled insight, not exploration traces.

Here's the pattern in practice:

```typescript
import { createDeepAgent } from 'ai-sdk-deepagent';
import { anthropic } from '@ai-sdk/anthropic';

// Research subagent: compress exploration into structured findings
const researchAgent = {
  name: 'research-agent',
  description: 'Deep research with condensed output',
  systemPrompt: `Execute thorough research using available tools.
    
    Output format (required):
    {
      "findings": "2-3 sentence summary",
      "key_points": ["point1", "point2", "point3"],
      "sources": ["url1", "url2"]
    }
    
    Do NOT include search queries, intermediate reasoning, or tool call history.`,
  model: anthropic('claude-haiku-4-5-20251001'), // Cheaper model for focused work
};

const agent = createDeepAgent({
  model: anthropic('claude-sonnet-4-5-20250929'),
  systemPrompt: `You coordinate complex tasks. Delegate research to research-agent.
    It returns structured findings. Use those findings to complete your task.`,
  subagents: [researchAgent],
});
```

The key: **input specification and output schema are explicit**. The subagent is a pure function: `research(topic) → {findings, key_points, sources}`.

## Measuring the Impact

[Cursor's research](https://cursor.com/blog/semsearch) on semantic search demonstrates this quantitatively. Their agent performs extensive codebase exploration (semantic search + grep) in isolation, returning only relevant code segments. Result: 12.5% accuracy improvement. The main agent never sees the search process—just the compressed results.

This is context engineering, not prompt engineering. The question isn't "how do I write a better prompt?" It's "what information needs compression and what's the transformation function?"

## When to Use Subagents

Use subagents when **detail doesn't matter, only outcome matters**:

### 1. Research Tasks (Codebase or Web)

```typescript
// Parent agent doesn't need to see 50 web searches
// It needs: "Here's what I found about X"

const webResearchAgent = {
  name: 'web-research',
  description: 'Comprehensive web research',
  tools: [webSearch, webFetch], // These generate thousands of tokens
  systemPrompt: 'Research thoroughly. Return 3-paragraph summary with sources.',
};
```

### 2. Data Analysis

```typescript
// Parent doesn't need to see pandas operations
// It needs: "Mean: X, outliers: Y, correlation: Z"

const analysisAgent = {
  name: 'data-analysis',
  description: 'Statistical analysis of datasets',
  tools: [executeCode], // Runs analysis scripts
  systemPrompt: 'Analyze data. Return: summary stats, key insights, visualizations.',
};
```

### 3. Mundane Automation

[LangChain notes](https://blog.langchain.com/deep-agents/) that Claude Code's todo tool is essentially a no-op—it's context engineering, not functionality. Similarly:

```typescript
// Git commit message generation
const commitAgent = {
  name: 'commit-message',
  description: 'Generate commit messages from diffs',
  systemPrompt: 'Analyze git diff. Output: conventional commit message, nothing else.',
};
```

## Implementation Patterns

### Pattern 1: Structured Output Enforcement

```typescript
const agent = createDeepAgent({
  model: anthropic('claude-sonnet-4-5-20250929'),
  subagents: [{
    name: 'analyzer',
    description: 'Code quality analysis',
    systemPrompt: `Analyze code quality. Return ONLY valid JSON:
      {
        "score": 0-100,
        "issues": [{"type": "string", "severity": "high|medium|low", "line": number}],
        "recommendations": ["string"]
      }`,
  }],
});

// Subagent output is immediately parseable
for await (const event of agent.streamWithEvents({ 
  prompt: 'Analyze the quality of auth.ts' 
})) {
  if (event.type === 'subagent-finish') {
    const analysis = JSON.parse(event.result);
    console.log(`Quality score: ${analysis.score}`);
    // No context pollution from subagent's analysis process
  }
}
```

### Pattern 2: Model Mixing

```typescript
// Orchestrator uses Sonnet (reasoning)
// Subagents use Haiku (speed + cost)

const agent = createDeepAgent({
  model: anthropic('claude-sonnet-4-5-20250929'),
  subagents: [
    {
      name: 'formatter',
      model: anthropic('claude-haiku-4-5-20251001'), // Fast, cheap
      description: 'Code formatting',
    },
    {
      name: 'researcher', 
      model: anthropic('claude-haiku-4-5-20251001'), // Fast, cheap
      description: 'Quick fact lookup',
    },
  ],
});
```

### Pattern 3: Context Isolation Monitoring

```typescript
// Track what actually gets returned to parent

let contextSavings = { tokensBefore: 0, tokensAfter: 0 };

for await (const event of agent.streamWithEvents({ prompt: 'task' })) {
  if (event.type === 'subagent-start') {
    console.log(`Subagent ${event.subagentName} starting...`);
  }
  if (event.type === 'subagent-finish') {
    // Subagent used N tokens internally, returned M tokens to parent
    // Compression ratio: N/M
    console.log(`Compressed output: ${event.result.length} chars`);
  }
}
```

## Anti-Patterns to Avoid

### ❌ Shared Mutable State

```typescript
// Don't do this
const sharedState = { designDecisions: [] };

const agent = createDeepAgent({
  subagents: [
    { name: 'designer', /* mutates sharedState */ },
    { name: 'implementer', /* reads sharedState */ },
  ],
});
```

Why it fails: race conditions, order dependencies, implicit contracts.

### ❌ Chatty Subagents

```typescript
// Don't do this
systemPrompt: `Coordinate with other agents to align on the approach...`
```

Why it fails: exponential coordination overhead, context explosion.

### ❌ Over-specialization

```typescript
// Don't do this
subagents: [
  { name: 'button-specialist' },
  { name: 'form-specialist' },  
  { name: 'navigation-specialist' },
]
```

Why it fails: granularity creates integration hell. Subagents should compress complexity, not multiply it.

## When NOT to Use Subagents

[Cognition recommends](https://cognition.ai/blog/dont-build-multi-agents) starting single-threaded. One agent, continuous context, coherent decisions. Add subagents only when:

1. Context window becomes the bottleneck
2. Parallel exploration provides value (research, analysis)
3. You can define clear input/output contracts

[Google's ADK guide](https://developers.googleblog.com/architecting-efficient-context-aware-multi-agent-framework-for-production/) is explicit: "Every model call and sub-agent sees the minimum context required." If you can't define what context is minimum and necessary, you don't need a subagent yet.

## Conclusion

Subagents aren't organizational units. They're compression functions. The mental model shift:

- ❌ "This subagent specializes in frontend work"
- ✅ "This subagent compresses codebase exploration into structured findings"

Design subagents around information transformation, not domain expertise. Define explicit contracts: input schemas, output formats, token budgets. Monitor compression ratios.

As [Phil Schmid notes](https://www.philschmid.de/context-engineering-part-2): "Don't over-anthropomorphize your agents. You don't need an 'Org Chart' of agents (Manager, Designer, Coder) that chat with each other."

Build context compression pipelines instead.

**Note:** ai-sdk-deepagent was built by studying Claude Code's architecture and patterns from [HumanLayer's agent implementations](https://github.com/humanlayer/humanlayer/tree/main/.claude/agents). Their work on structured, purpose-driven agents informed many of the design decisions in this framework.

---

**References:**
- [Cognition: Don't Build Multi-Agents](https://cognition.ai/blog/dont-build-multi-agents)
- [Anthropic: Context Engineering for AI Agents](https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/effective-context-engineering-for-ai-agents)
- [Anthropic: Building Agents with Claude Agent SDK](https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/building-agents-with-the-claude-agent-sdk)
- [Phil Schmid: Context Engineering Part 2](https://www.philschmid.de/context-engineering-part-2)
- [Cursor: Semantic Search Research](https://cursor.com/blog/semsearch)
- [LangChain: Deep Agents](https://blog.langchain.com/deep-agents/)
- [Google: Multi-Agent Framework for Production](https://developers.googleblog.com/architecting-efficient-context-aware-multi-agent-framework-for-production/)
- [HumanLayer: Claude Code Agent Examples](https://github.com/humanlayer/humanlayer/tree/main/.claude/agents)

**Framework:** [ai-sdk-deepagent on GitHub](https://github.com/chrispangg/ai-sdk-deepagent)
