docs/site/blog/published/27-12-25-welcome.mdx, before:

---
title: Welcome to the Deep Agents Blog
description: Thoughts on building agents with planning, file systems, and subagent delegation using Vercel AI SDK
author: Chris Pang
date: 2025-12-27
---

## Hey there

I'm starting this blog to document what I'm learning while building Deep Agents. I'll be writing about:

- How the architecture actually works (and why certain decisions were made)
- Practical patterns I've found useful
- New features as they get added
- Things that work well (and things that don't)

## What are Deep Agents?

Deep Agents are a way to build more capable AI agents by combining four key capabilities:

1. **Planning tools** - Agents can break down tasks and track progress with `write_todos`
2. **Virtual filesystem** - Persistent file operations that work across multiple tool calls
3. **Subagent spawning** - Delegate specialized work to focused sub-agents
4. **Detailed prompting** - Clear system prompts that help agents understand what they can do

This is based on LangChain's DeepAgents framework, reimplemented for Vercel AI SDK v6.

## Get Started

If you want to try it out, the [Getting Started guide](/docs/get-started) walks through the basics, or you can check out the [examples](https://github.com/chrispangg/ai-sdk-deepagent/tree/main/examples) to see it in action.

Commit message:

docs: standardize terminology to "Deep Agent" across documentation and examples
- Updated instances of "Deep Agents" to "Deep Agent" for consistency.
- Modified descriptions and titles in README, blog posts, and documentation to reflect the singular term.
- Adjusted examples and comments in code files to align with the new terminology.

docs/site/blog/published/27-12-25-welcome.mdx, after:

---
title: Welcome to the Deep Agent Blog
description: Thoughts on building agents with planning, file systems, and subagent delegation using Vercel AI SDK
author: Chris Pang
date: 2025-12-27
---

## Hey there

I'm starting this blog to document what I'm learning while building Deep Agent. I'll be writing about:

- How the architecture actually works (and why certain decisions were made)
- Practical patterns I've found useful
- New features as they get added
- Things that work well (and things that don't)

## What is Deep Agent?

Deep Agent is a way to build more capable AI agents by combining four key capabilities:

1. **Planning tools** - Agents can break down tasks and track progress with `write_todos`
2. **Virtual filesystem** - Persistent file operations that work across multiple tool calls
3. **Subagent spawning** - Delegate specialized work to focused sub-agents
4. **Detailed prompting** - Clear system prompts that help agents understand what they can do

This is based on LangChain's DeepAgents framework, reimplemented for Vercel AI SDK v6.

## Get Started

If you want to try it out, the [Getting Started guide](/docs/get-started) walks through the basics, or you can check out the [examples](https://github.com/chrispangg/ai-sdk-deepagent/tree/main/examples) to see it in action.
